# Internationalization (i18n)

This app uses `i18next-parser` tool and you also have to use it very regularly.
It is an extractor that crawls the code, finds all the used translation keys,
and updates translation files. So you don't need to update them by hand. Just
run that command and that's it. Also, if you forget to run it the CI will
reject your commit.

## Usage

The most important thing to remember is the following command:

```bash
npm run i18n
```

It does many things for you.

### Using translation keys

Remember that translation keys must be string literals in the code. So
variables or string interpolation are not allowed.

```ts
// Don'ts
t(LANG)
t(lang)
t(`languages.${lang}`)

// Do's
t('some-translation-key')
```

### Pluralization

When you want to use pluralization, you must use `count` parameter. Don't use
`amount` or `number`. Then run `npm run i18n` and it will create both singular
and plural stubs for your translations.

```ts
t('some-translation-key', { count: 1 })
```

```json5
{
  // ...
  "some-translation-key_one": "",
  "some-translation-key_other": "",
  // ...
}
```

### Nesting

When you have multiple translation keys that belong together, you can use
nesting. Then run `npm run i18n` and it will create stubs for all of your
translation keys and keep them grouped in the translation files.

```ts
t('some.translation.key')
```

```json5
{
  // ...
  "some": {
    "translation": {
      "key": ""
    }
  }
  // ...
}
```

### Helper functions

There are situations where you need to translate something that is stored in
a variable. E.g. status of the concept. In these situations, you need to use
if-else jungles. To keep your code clean, there is
`common/utils/translation-helpers.ts` where you can create a helper function
and put your if-else jungle there. There are already some, so in the
most common use cases, the helper function you are looking for already exists.
If not, just follow the example of others.

Then you can simply pass your variable to that helper function.

```ts
translateLanguage(lang, t)
```

## Use cases

### Adding new translation

When you want to add a new translation, just write your code:

```tsx
<button>
  {t('some-translation-key')}
</button>
```

Then run `npm run i18n`. It creates subs for that translation key in every
translation file.

```json5
{
  // ...
  "some-translation-key": "",
  // ...
}
```

Then you only have to write the actual text between the quotation marks. Or if
you don't have the translation, just left it empty.

### Removing translation

When you want to remove some code block that contains translation keys, just
remove that code block. Then you run `npm run i18n` and it finds out if these
translation keys are used somewhere else or not.

If it finds out that there is a translation key in the translation files that
is never used, it will move it to `${domain}_old.json` file. Review these files
and remove the unused translations. You don't have to commit these files into
git.

### Renaming translation key

When you are refactoring translation keys or something, edit your code first
and then run `npm run i18n`. If adds the stubs for new translation keys and
moves unused ones to `${domain}_old.json` files. Then you have to manually move
these texts under new translation keys.

### Fixing merge conflicts

Translation keys in the translation files are sorted alphabetically so merge
conflicts are pretty rare. But sometimes this happens. `npm run i18n` will
fail if the translation files don't contain valid JSON. So you have to
"fix" the conflict by hand. Just keep both versions and ensure that it is still
a valid JSON.

Then fix all the conflicts in your code and finally run `npm run i18n`. It will
update the translation files, sort translation keys, and so on. Review the
changes and commit if they look good.

## CI

If you forgot to run `npm run i18n` your commit will not get passed from CI.

It will check that no new translation keys are missing and there are no old
unused translation keys in the translation files.

To fix this, you just need to run `npm run i18n` and push changes.

## Namespaces

Translations are divided into multiple namespaces. And there is a translation
file for each namespace. `npm run i18n` recognizes namespaces automatically so
just use them.

In your code, you can specify the default namespace so that you don't need to
pass the namespace every time. It is only default, so you can always use another
namespace when you want. You just need to pass it to the `t` function.

```ts
const { t } = useTranslation('default-namespace');
t('some.translation.key', { ns: 'another-namespace' })
```

At the moment, we load all namespaces into memory. But in the future, it might
be useful to load only some namespaces. This happens inside of the
`getServerSideProps` of each page. This way, it is possible to divide
translations into the common namespace and page-specific namespaces. This is the
most common approach.

Another approaches also exist and it is not easy to say which one is the best.
It's not either easy to determine if some text should be in this or that
namespace. That's why there will always be space for refactoring in the
translations.

The third approach (what I recommend) is that general things are in the common
namespace and all the rest are in the terminology namespace for this project. In
other applications, there will also be the same common namespace and the other
namespace for the rest of the translations. This way it would be possible to
cache translations instead of passing them down on every page change.

## Troubleshooting

If the extractor generates an output you didn't expect, the problem is probably
in your code.

### No pluralization

```json5
// expected
{
  "some-translation-key_one": "",
  "some-translation-key_other": "",
}

// actual
{
  "some-translation-key": "",
}
```

The problem is that you don't pass `count` argument to the `t` function.

## Pluralization with extras

```json5
// expected
{
  "some-translation-key_one": "",
  "some-translation-key_other": "",
}

// actual
{
  "some-translation-key": "",
  "some-translation-key_one": "",
  "some-translation-key_other": "",
}
```

The problem is that you have passed `count` argument to the `t` function
correctly in one place but not in another place.
